# Multi Protein Ligand Binding Prediction

Many of the greatest inventions or discoveries in the field of drug development has been through pure chance (most famously penicillin).  But we cannot always depend on serendipitous circumstances to ensure the discovery of life saving drugs for the myriad of diseases that still claim many lives every year. They include neurological conditions like Alzheimer’s and Multiple Sclerosis, genetic conditions like Haemophilia and STIs like Hepatitis B, HIV/AIDS and HPV. Instead we need to have a solid framework that relies on conducting extensive research and scientific experiments to arrive at a suitable candidate drug for a disease and that is the base of the field of modern drug discovery and development.  But because of the sheer size of the chemical space, it takes a very long time and a lot of resources and money to introduce a viable drug into the market. As a result, we need other ways to narrow down the candidates in the nascent stages of the drug discovery and development cycle.

This particular ’nascent’ stage we are talking about is the protein-ligand binding prediction. At the genetic level, the expression or inhibition of certain proteins or pathways leads to the manifestation of disease. The first step in the drug and development cycle is to find the protein (also called target) that is responsible for the disease.  The next step is to find a small molecule compound (a drug) that can either inhibit (antagonist) or stimulate (agonist) the protein to diminish or halt the progression of the disease.  This is the step that the thesis focuses on by trying to come up with smarter ways to reduce wet lab experiments and use in silico methods to speed up the drug development cycle.

One of these ’smarter’ ways would be to use AI, in specific, neural networks and machine learning principles. Use of AI in drug discovery and development is a relatively new application, but has been gaining popularity due to the availability of large, well-curated chemical datasets and the huge success of AI in other  fields like Computer Vision and NLP (Natural Language Processing). There have been many papers published and research conducted on single protein-ligand prediction.  An AI model is trained on ligand (also called small molecule or compound or drug) features for a corresponding protein (also called disease target), and later validated and tested.  The model parameters are then reset and trained freshly for the next protein-ligands set. But to the best of my knowledge, there is no significant work published on the possibility of a multi-protein ligand classifier.

What I have tried to explore in this thesis project is a way to classify protein-ligand bindings using machine learning and deep learning principles. First, a voxelization technique has been developed to represent 3D protein structures from the the PCBA (PubChem BioAssay) and PDBbind dataset.  Next, the protein-ligand binding site is featurized by using an Autoencoder DNN architecture to process the raw voxelization data. Finally, these protein descriptors are combined with ligand features (which can be calculated with different available tools) and used as an input to train ML classifiers like LightGBM and GBM. Once successfully trained, these classifiers will be able to predict with high certainty if a protein and ligand can pair or not. The whole pipeline has also been optimized with techniques like imputation, feature selection etc. Results look promising as compared with the state-of-the-art, where our method has a classification AUC-ROC score of 0.836 and the state-of-the-art with 0.867.  This may be less than the results from the state-of-the-art,  but it must also be taken into consideration that the task objective here is multi-protein ligand binding prediction, which is intuitively more difficult than single protein-ligand binding prediction.  With the avail-ability of good datasets this process is much cheaper and faster and can exponentially speed up thedrug discovery and development process.
